In the last video we went over some basic
concepts about joins that are summarized
in this diagram.
Inner joins keep everything that's common
to two tables, not including null values.
Left joins keep everything in
the left table, including nulls, and
include only matching information
from the table in the right.
Right joins keep everything in
the right table, including nulls, and
include only matching information
from the table on the left.
And full outer joins,
which are not supported by Bi SQL,
include every row from both tables and
match them up whenever possible.
All of these concepts are accurate, and
this picture is a good reference that you
will see often in textbooks or
on the Internet, but it can also be
a little misleading if you forget about
the concept of Cartesian products.
You'll see why when you start working
with concepts whose maximum carnality
constraints are greater than 1.
For example,
the diagram makes it look like
all inner joins will have output tables
that are smaller than the input tables.
However, that will often not be true if
values in one of your tables can be linked
up to many values in the other table.
To see how that could happen, let's
work through an example step by step.
Let's join employees with their
departments again, but this time each
employee can be in many departments and
each department can have many employees.
Recall from the first week of the course
that in order to put concepts that have
many-to-many relationships into
a relational database you always need to
have a linking table that has foreign keys
of the tables you ultimately want to link.
So under these circumstances,
we will need to join three tables
to ultimately combine employee and
department information.
When you join multiple tables,
you join two at a time and
then join the results of each
join with subsequent tables.
Therefore, to join the information
in the employee table with
the information in the department table,
first we have to join the employees
table to the assignment table.
When we execute this join, the database
will make all the possible combinations of
rows between the tables for the Cartesian
product as long as the employee IDs match.
In this case, sometimes there are multiple
assignment rows with the same employee ID,
so the join will output each
combination of employee and
assignment rows that have
the same employee ID numbers.
As a result, the inner join will output
eight rows even though the Employee table
is only five rows and
has one null value that is included.
When we join the results
of our first join,
the Department table, six of those initial
eight rows will still be retained because
all six of those rows have matching
department IDs in the Department table.
So, in the end,
the result of our inner join has more rows
than either of the tables we were joining.
Remember that this is possible every time
you look at the slightly misleading but
still very useful picture for reference.
There's also another aspect of joins
that's hard to appreciate when looking at
this picture, and that happens when
you join multiple tables together
using different types of joins,
which often means you accidentally
join multiple tables together
using different types of joins.
To see what I mean, let's link our
Employee and Department tables up again.
But this time, we want to use a left join
because we want the full list of all
the employees, regardless of whether
they are assigned to a department.
You can see this time,
the result of our first join has nine rows
because the known value in row five
of the employee table is included.
So far so good.
If we then use another left joint
to connect the result of that
first joint to department table, we would
retain all nine rows in the output, and
three of those rows would have no
values in the department column.
But now, what if we forgot the word left
in our second joint statement, so that we
accidentally computed an inner joint
between the results of our first joint and
department table?
Now, four of our nine
rows would be removed,
because they don't have department ID's
that are present in the department table.
If you have a really large dataset, and
we're aggregating over the results,
rather than looking at each row
of the join output on it's own
Query would certainly run but your results
would not be what you think they are.
And it might be hard to
notice that major mistake.
Sometimes you do intentionally want
to vary your join types when you're
combining tables.
So I don't want you to think that you
always have to use the same join type.
Instead, I just want you to remember
that the order in which you
run your joins matters.
So you need to make sure that you
are applying the correct type of join,
to the correct pairs of tables and
the correct point in your query.
There's one more thing you need
to remember about joins, and
that's what happens when you join
tables that have duplicate rows.
Joins retain duplicate rows in output
tables because there's no mechanism within
the concept of a join on its
own that would remove them.
So a left join of these two
tables would look like this.
The duplicated rows in the employee
table gets passed along to
the results of the join.
Thanks to Cartesian products, things can
get a little challenging when you join two
tables that not only have duplicates but
also have many to many relationships.
Essentially what happens is that
your duplicates get multiplied.
Let's go back to our join of the employees
pointed to and department tables.
Now we have a pair of duplicate
rows in the Employees table and
a pair of duplicate rows
in the Departments table.
When we make our first inner join with
the employees in a appointed to table.
Each of those duplicates is going to get
multiplied by all the rows in the linking
table that have the same employee ID.
So the output will give you a duplicate of
each of the rows in the linking table that
have the employee ID of DD.
But it gets even more
complicated than that.
When we inner join the output of that
first joint to the Department's table,
each of the rows have a department
idea of 1, will get duplicated.
So, the final results will look like this.
You can see that we went from having two
rows of data from the employee Daisy
to six rows of data from
the employee Daisy,
even though only two of those
rows represent real records.
This is what can happen
when you join duplicates.
You could imagine how out of hand
these multiplicative effects can get
if you join lots of duplicates.
In fact, we are going to see an example
of that with our Dognition dataset.
Now that you have seen the types of things
that can happen with messy datasets you
might be able to sympathize with the
database people who want to use different
terminology for the design of
a database versus a real database.
Database design, based on set theory,
assumes there are no duplicate rows.
In real life there are duplicate rows and
they can be very challenging to work with.
Using terminology that differentiates
theory from real life can be useful.
In terms of what to do
about these duplicate rows,
here are some good practices to follow.
First whenever possible it's
a good idea to clean your data and
get rid of as many duplicates as
you can before doing your analysis.
But sometimes that's not practical or
possible.
So you should get in the habit of looking
at small testing examples of the rows that
will be outputted by every
pair of tables you join.
Before you ink multiple joins together
in one query step by step make sure
each individual joint you are going to
run gives you the results you expect
before you start aggregating the results
of the join or doing anything else fancy.
This will also help that you make sure
you don't enter the wrong kind of join at
a given step.
Taking the time to double check each part
of your query at the beginning of your
analysis, will save you from
having a lot of trouble later on,
due to misinterpreting results that
you didn't know were incorrect.
So I highly recommend this habit.
It will make sure that you
have control of your joins,
rather than letting them control you.
With all this knowledge,
you are ready to join some tables.
Have fun, and
don't forget about Cartesian products.